#Rationale
*À La Recherche du Teùps Perdu* is often studied for its aesthetic complexity, its intervention in the French political climate of the late nineteenth century, and its treatment of sexuality at the turn of the century. These contemporary conceptions of Proust obscure the publication history which brought them into being. Between the appearance of the first volume, *Du côté de chez Swann*, in 1914 by Grasset and the following serial publication of the entire novel by *NRF*, which began in 1919, interveines the occurrence of World War I. It was in this historical context that Proust significantly revised and expanded his plan for the novel, the final volumes of which would not appear until after his death in 1922. Proust’s concept of an uninterrupted novel, a continuous work whose component parts can only be appreciated by contextualizing them within the unbroken whole, would not materialize publicly until the first simultaneous publication of the entire *Recherche* by Gallimard in 1946. The aesthetic unity sustained across seven interwoven novels, an assumption which of often goes unchallenged today, is a product of a series of published versions of Proust work that its contemporary audience (including Proust, himself) never experienced. As a changing metonymic component of *La Recherche* which portends the volumes to come, *Du côté de chez Swann* exists in variant editions that reveal the fractures and fissures in the aesthetic, political, and sexual content of Proust’s larger work. Restoring these textual differences therefore provides a richer and more historically-aware perspective of Proust’s novel, one that enables scholars to ground Proust’s aesthetic details in the political events of early Twentieth Century that account for them.

#The Texts to be Versioned
I plan to reveal changes to the madeleine scene between the 1914 and 1919 editions of*Du côté de chez Swann*. As perhaps the most pivotal moment in the novel, which launches the narrative and introduces the aesthetic components of involuntary memory, compenents which radiate outward from the Overture across the following volumes, the changing aesthetic content of the scene crystallizes the variant conceptions of the whole *Recherche* which they portend. Put differently, the aesthetic breaks between the different versions of the madeleine scene point toward the changing sexual and political content between the version of *La Recherche* proposed by Proust in 1914 and the version which became serialized by *NRF*following World War I.

#Rationale for Selected Texts
This approach omits variants from the 1946 Gallimard edition to focus exlusively on the aesthetic and political break produced by World War I. That edition could be included as part of a longer process of versioning the novel. Translations are also exlucded. Of note are the differences between the 1922, 1981, and 2003 translations of the novel. C.K. Scott Moncrieff’s 1922 translation suppresses much of the novel’s sexual content, including syntactical and stylistic changes which relate to it. Versioning the differences between the three English translations would provide a larger view of changes to the novel’s aesthetic and sexual content over time, allowing scholars to ground those variants in the different geographic, historical, and political contexts that account for them. Versioning Moncrieff’s 1922 version against the 1946 Gallimard edition, for instance, would allow for a transnational linkage of the aesthetic and the political as they shape enduring views of Proust’s content and technique. The proposed process of versioning the 1914 and 1919 editions of *Du côté de chez Swann* could be scaled to acocmmodate these other versions in the future.

#Versions
As I conceive of it here, each change in the relationship between the volume and the novel (embodied by the editions and printings which materialize the textual changes that demonstrate that changing conception of the whole) marks a new version. Proust’s original *Du côté de chez Swann*, located within a three-volume *Recherche*, is one version; the republication of the novel by *NRF* after the war, now located within an expanded and expanding series of forthcoming volumes, is another version. Versioning, as I seek to deploy it, tracks how changes in the textual components of a scene work as metonyms for evolving instantiations of Proust’s modernist project.

#Workflow
The OCR transcriptions of the 1914 and 1919 versions of the madeleine scene will be versioned using Juxta commons. The variants will then be exported and subjected to two sorting processes. The first sorting process will categorize variants into one of three categories: aesthetic, political, and sexual. The second sorting process will be more granular, categorizing elements within one of the three initial categories. For instance, aesthetic variants for the madeleine scene will be sorted between the folowing sub-categories: gustatory, memory-related, geographic, and ethnic. Variants that do not fall under a category will be treated labelled “other.” The number of variants for each category will then be visualized using Circos, to produce a circular map that represents the textual composition of each variant scene, in addition to what changes to the scene are favored over time. The list of individual variants, sorted using a different category for each color, will appear as a legend for each graph.

#Outcomes
The legend will provide transparency in my sorting methods and allow other scholars to question my judgement, or use the variants I’ve identified to make arguments about the changing political, aesthetic, or sexual content of the passage being visualized. In particular, the granular map will allow Proust scholars to view the changing composition of the scene with each version (in this case, the aesthetic features of the madeleine scene). These granular changes will enable scholars to connect specific groupings of variants from a scene to larger elements that run throughout Proust’s novel. Tracking what categories of change occur to a scene across the versions that shape Proust’s novel over time will also facilitate scholarhsip that grounds the changing textual content of the novel in the historical and political context which situates the version embodying those changes. Sharing my workflow will allow other scholars to recategorize the variants I provide to produce their own graphs. This method can easily scale to accomodate a large of small number of versions of *La Recherche*, from a visualization of the 1914 and 1919 editions of one scene, to a visualization of all six French and English versions of *Du côté de chez Swann*.
